I was raised Roman Catholic and was always frustrated by the constant evasion of contradictions by appeals to confounding factors, such as unintelligibility, confusion, or metaphor. Many common critiques of Catholicism, such as the frequent heretical comments by Pope Francis (e.g., his universalism) is evaded by Catholics with statements such as “he didn’t literally mean that”, “there’s a language barrier”, “the press misrepresents him”, or “we can’t know what that means.” Consequently, I thought it useful to present the five unique things that personally convinced me to reconsider Catholicism.
1. The Self-Defeating Doctrine of Infallible Councils
The Catechism states:
“‘the infallibility promised to the Church is also present in the body of bishops when, together with Peter’s successor, they exercise the supreme Magisterium,’ above all in an Ecumenical Council” (CCC 891, p. 252).
Therefore, an ecumenical council, which is a gathering of bishops exercising their authority over the Church and confirmed by the Pope, cannot err (CCC, p. 744). However, there is demonstrable historical evidence that gatherings of bishops to exercise their authority over the universal Church were confirmed by the Pope that directly contradict later councils and orthodoxy. For example, the Council of Sirmium in 351 rejected the Council of Nicaea, and the surviving second creed from 357 openly endorsed subordinationism, stating
“the Father is greater, and that the Son is subordinated to the Father” (EarlyChurchTexts, 2024).
In 357, Pope Liberius “signed the semi-Arian formula of Sirmium and broke off communion with St. Athanasius, declaring him separated from the Roman Church because of his use of the term ‘consubstantial’” (Mattei, 2019, p. 14).
Beyond this self-defeater, the mere existence of universal councils to reverse the decision of earlier universal councils demonstrates that there was not a widespread ancient understanding of the infallibility of ecumenical councils; rather this is a Catholic invention. For example,
“[the] twin Councils of Seleucia and Rimini, convoked by the Emperor and intended to be ecumenical, like the Council of Nicaea (325), are not numbered among the eight Ecumenical Councils of antiquity by the Church today. They nevertheless had as many as 560 bishops in attendance, almost all the Fathers of Christianity, and they appeared ‘ecumenical’ to their contemporaries” (Mattei, 2019, p. 15).
The second and more obvious contradiction of an ecumenical council is Vatican II’s promotion of religious liberty. Regardless of whether one supports religious liberty, Vatican II clearly opposes the historical teachings of Catholicism.
Multiple popes, such as Gregory XVI and Pius IX, opposed religious freedom. The 1864 papal encyclical, Quanta Cura, subtitled “Condemning Current Errors”, states that it is:
“an ‘insanity, [that] liberty of conscience and worship is each man’s personal right, which ought to be legally proclaimed and asserted in every rightly constituted society’” (Pius IX, 1864).
According to the First Vatican Council, a pope is infallible when communicating “ex cathedra”. Contrary to what Catholic apologists say, there is no requirement for the pope to explicitly state “this is ex cathedra” for it to be so. For Vatican I explicitly defines that an ex cathedra statement is:
“[when] he [the pope] defines a doctrine concerning faith or morals to be held by the whole church” (Catholic Church, 1868).
Pius IX’s commentary is clearly defining a doctrine on morals to be held by the whole church, which can be made no clearer by the subtitling of his encyclical condemning errors. This is thus an infallible statement, no matter the canon lawyers who try to escape this through inventing new requirements on infallibility not stated at the actual infallible council.
Vatican II “infallibly” contradicts this doctrine by stating:
“This Vatican Council declares that the human person has a right to religious freedom” (Catholic Church, 1965).
How the Catholic Church managed to completely reverse their historical doctrine in so short a time is evidence of its bending to human pressure and cowardice. The Catholic will undoubtedly dodge these plain contradictions through third-party appeals, but it is my opinion that no objective analysis can rationally square Vatican II as anything other than a Catholic heresy, unraveling their own doctrines of infallibility.
2. Doctrines that Contradict the Bible
There are many doctrines that I could reference in this point, but I will leave it at two lesser discussed doctrines to introduce the reader to new issues.
One of Pope Francis’ major decisions was to reverse the Biblical doctrine of the death penalty. Francis stated that the death penalty “is in itself contrary to the Gospel” (Harris, 2017). This change is now codified in the Catechism (CCC 2267, p. 583). I sincerely wonder sometimes what Bible the Pope reads, and if he eliminates books from his personal canon if he disagrees with them. Paul clearly acknowledges and supports the death penalty in his Letter to the Romans:
“Let every person be subordinate to the higher authorities, for there is no authority except from God, and those that exist have been established by God. Therefore, whoever resists authority opposes what God has appointed, and those who oppose it will bring judgment upon themselves. For rulers are not a cause of fear to good conduct, but to evil. Do you wish to have no fear of authority? Then do what is good and you will receive approval from it, for it is a servant of God for your good. But if you do evil, be afraid, for it does not bear the sword without purpose; it is the servant of God to inflict wrath on the evildoer.” (Romans 13:1–5)
As if any other evidence was needed, historical popes made frequent use of executioners; Giovanni Bugatti is said to have carried out over 500 executions for the Vatican. This is clear historical evidence to demonstrate Francis is inventing doctrines, not representing the unchanging truth of the Bible.
Another major shift in Catholicism over the last 50 years was removing the requirement for women to veil in Church. I will probably lose my Protestant friends at this point, but the Bible says what it says, regardless of who likes it. Paul, in his Letter to the Corinthians, writes:
“Any man who prays or prophesies with his head covered brings shame upon his head. But any woman who prays or prophesies with her head unveiled brings shame upon her head” (1 Corinthians 11:4–5).
Beyond being in the Bible, the requirement to veil was the historical teaching of the Church. The Book of Pontiffs states that “On St. Peter’s instruction” the second pope “decreed that a woman should have her head covered when entering church” (Davis, 2000, p. 2). The obligation to veil is also recorded in both Calvin and Luther, and continued to be an official Catholic requirement until the 1983 Code of Canon Law. The previous Code of Canon Law, released in 1917, stated:
“women, however, shall have a covered head and be modestly dressed, especially when they approach the table of the Lord” (CIC 1262, p. 381).
That women no longer must veil shows the Catholic Church is directly contradicting the Bible and its own historical teachings.
3. Lack of Apostolic Sources Demonstrating Deference to Rome
It is absolutely certain that deference to Rome became the predominant Christian view, as can be shown by Catholicism being the largest Christian denomination in the world today. It is also historically certain that these ideas emerged early in Christian history, as Irenaeus wrote around A.D. 180:
“it is a matter of necessity that every Church should agree with this Church [Rome], on account of its pre-eminent authority” (Irenaeus, 2015, p. 207).
However, these ideas are not present in the Apostolic Church, and we find nowhere in Paul’s letters that he deferred to Peter’s instruction. To the contrary, Paul recounts correcting Peter’s behavior in Galatians 2:11–14.
The Apostolic Father Polycarp, potentially a hearer of the Apostle John, never mentions anything about Rome in his surviving letter, though does provide ample other advice for proper behavior (Polycarp, n.d.).
Ignatius, in his famed seven martyrdom letters, similarly never mentions anything about deference to Rome. If anything was to be gleaned on the subject from Ignatius, it would be that he seems to find the Ephesians sufficient without Roman connection:
“May I attain to this, so that I may be found in the lot of the Christians of Ephesus, who have always had intercourse with the apostles by the power of Jesus Christ, with Paul, and John, and Timothy the most faithful” (Ignatius, n.d.).
If Ignatius believed deference to the Roman Church was necessary, this would have been the perfect place to say so.
The Didache is an early Christian document supposedly delivering the teachings of the twelve apostles. While the exact date is debated, some scholars, such as Enrico Mazza, have argued that its contents can be traced back to A.D. 48 (Aquilina, 2007, p. 63). The Didache records no information about deference to Rome and instructs Christians to:
“Appoint, therefore, for yourselves, bishops and deacons worthy of the Lord” (Didache, n.d.).
The Didache is thus instructing each community to appoint their own bishops, which is quite different from the Roman practice of appointing and confirming bishops for the community.
4. The Condemnation of Pope Honorius
In Catholic theology, the pope “in virtue of his position as successor of St. Peter, is the chief pastor of the whole Church” and literally “the Vicar of Christ upon earth” (Catholic Answers, n.d.). However, the “infallible” Third Council of Constantinople declared that Honorius was the instrument of Satan:
“The holy and Ecumenical Synod further says, this pious and orthodox Creed of the Divine grace would be sufficient for the full knowledge and confirmation of the orthodox faith. But as the author of evil, who, in the beginning, availed himself of the aid of the serpent, and by it brought the poison of death upon the human race, has not desisted, but in like manner now, having found suitable instruments for working out his will (we mean Theodorus, who was Bishop of Pharan, Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paul and Peter, who were Archbishops of this royal city, and moreover, Honorius who was Pope of the elder Rome” (Catholic Church, 681).
Furthermore, the same council posthumously expelled Honorius from the Church and anathematized him:
“And with these we define that there shall be expelled from the holy Church of God and anathematized Honorius who was some time Pope of Old Rome, because of what we found written by him to Sergius, that in all respects he followed his view and confirmed his impious doctrines” (Catholic Church, 681).
How does it make sense that the Vicar of Christ is infallibly declared a Satanic agent who is forever expelled from the Church? It is a plight to rationality to view this as a sensible position.
5. The Illogical Position of Single Determinism
The Catholic Church’s official position on justification is that nobody is able to freely choose God, unless God first grants him grace. This is stated at the “infallible” council of Trent in Chapter V of the sixth session:
“Justification is to be derived from the prevenient grace of God, through Jesus Christ, that is to say, from His vocation, whereby, without any merits existing on their parts, they are called…he [is] not able, by his own free will, without the grace of God, to move himself unto justice in His sight” (Catholic Church, 1547).
This is reiterated in Canon III of the same session:
“If any one saith, that without the prevenient inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and without his help, man can believe, hope, love, or be penitent as he ought, so as that the grace of Justification may be bestowed upon him; let him be anathema” (Catholic Church, 1547).
If God freely chooses to grant those grace so they may be converted, does that not imply there is a predestined elect? Actually, the Catholic Church would say yes; there is a predestined elect. The only contention the Catholic Church includes is that no one may be entirely confident that he is in the elect:
“If any one saith, that a man, who is born again and justified, is bound of faith to believe that he is assuredly in the number of the predestinate; let him be anathema” (Catholic Church, 1547).
So then, we have proven that the Catholic Church affirms that no man can freely choose God, God must take the first action, and there is indeed a predestined elect. However, if God chooses those who will be saved ahead of time, that necessarily requires that he chooses who not to elect; i.e., a predetermined elect logically implies a predetermined damned. This, the Catholic Church rejects:
“If any one saith, that the grace of Justification is only attained to by those who are predestined unto life; but that all others who are called, are called indeed, but receive not grace, as being, by the divine power, predestined unto evil; let him be anathema” (Catholic Church, 1547).
Thus, the Catholic Church affirms a logical contradiction as official, infallible doctrine. There is also a highly relevant Biblical passage found in Romans 9:
“before they had yet been born or had done anything, good or bad, in order that God’s elective plan might continue, not by works but by his call — she was told, ‘The older shall serve the younger.’ As it is written: ‘I loved Jacob but hated Esau.’ So it depends not upon a person’s will or exertion, but upon God, who shows mercy. For the scripture says to Pharaoh, “This is why I have raised you up, to show my power through you that my name may be proclaimed throughout the earth.” Consequently, he has mercy upon whom he wills, and he hardens whom he wills. You will say to me then, “Why [then] does he still find fault? For who can oppose his will?” But who indeed are you, a human being, to talk back to God? Will what is made say to its maker, “Why have you created me so?” Or does not the potter have a right over the clay, to make out of the same lump one vessel for a noble purpose and another for an ignoble one? What if God, wishing to show his wrath and make known his power, has endured with much patience the vessels of wrath made for destruction?”
From the scriptures, Paul writes that before birth, God decided whom he loved and whom he did not. Before time, God raised Pharaoh up for the purpose of hardening his heart; God as the potter has created vessels of wrath made for destruction.
