Let me start off by saying that I really like Bart Ehrman. I own seven of his books, used to be a member of his blog, and frequently listen to his podcast. I think Dr. Ehrman is unfairly criticized by the Christian-right. Ehrman is a great scholar and communicator, makes many interesting points, and most importantly, seems to be an honest man.
Now, I was listening to an episode of his Misquoting Jesus podcast where he discusses his views about how the doctrine of a completely inerrant Bible is a 19th century development:
“We were talking about the idea of the inerrancy of the Bible, that there’s no errors in the Bible of any kind whatsoever. I tried to explain that this is a modern development that started arising in the 19th century, end of the 19th century; it’s not the view Christianity has always had, it’s not the view the vast majority of Christians have ever had, and so it’s not a view you have to have.” (Ehrman & Lewis, 2024, 43:42)
For transparency, I do not personally believe in a completely inerrant Bible. However, I think that Ehrman’s point can be demonstrated to be historically inaccurate. I will illustrate this point through Gratian’s Decretum.
The Decretum was a twelfth-century “central text of western Christian ecclesiastical law and lawmaking” that influenced Aquinas, Dante, and Chaucer (Gratian et al., 1993, p. ix). It was formally titled the Harmony of Discordant Canons and sought “to make sense of the law of the Church and to teach it more effectively to others” (Gratian et al., 1993, p. ix).
Canon 7 of Distinction 9 in the collection presented by Fr. Augustine Thompson provides us with insight into the medieval church’s perspective on inerrancy. Gratian states:
“If one falsehood, however harmless, were contained in the sacred Scriptures, what authority would they possess? What opinion could be supported by the Scriptures, if the deceit of an indisputable falsehood detracted from their weight?” (Gratian et al., 1993, p. 31)
This certainly sounds like the doctrine of inerrancy that Dr. Ehrman is referencing in his podcast; namely, Gratian proposes that the Bible can contain no errors whatsoever, “however harmless.” The canon itself is sourced from Augustine, quoted as “Any falsehood in the canonical Scriptures would rob them of all authority” (Gratian et al., 1993, p. 31).
Even if there is contention about Augustine’s true beliefs, Gratian’s Decretum demonstrates that prominent theologians in the medieval Church were interpreting him as supporting strict inerrancy, and the doctrine of inerrancy was strong enough in the church’s consciousness to include in canon law compilations. Therefore, Ehrman’s thesis that “the idea of the inerrancy of the Bible, that’s there’s no errors in the Bible of any kind whatsoever…is a modern development that started arising in the 19th century” is not substantiated by the historical evidence.
Additionally, there are reasonable grounds to believe Augustine did, in fact, support inerrancy. In Augustine’s famed Letter 82 to Jerome, he states:
“For I confess to your Charity that I have learned to yield this respect and honour only to the canonical books of Scripture: of these alone do I most firmly believe that the authors were completely free from error. And if in these writings I am perplexed by anything which appears to me opposed to truth, I do not hesitate to suppose that either the manuscript is faulty, or the translator has not caught the meaning of what was said, or I myself have failed to understand it…I do not need to say that I do not suppose you to wish your books to be read like those of prophets or of apostles, concerning which it would be wrong to doubt that they are free from error.” (Augustine, 405)
Augustine’s assertion that scripture is “completely free from error” and he explains away “anything which appears to me opposed to truth” again strongly resembles the doctrine “that there’s no errors in the Bible of any kind whatsoever.”
