Abstract. An argument is presented showing that, on the assumption of Molinism, counterfactuals of
free human behavior must be explanatorily prior to God’s sovereign decree to create these humans, or
God becomes the author of evil. But, it is claimed, this explanatory order of God’s actions is logically
incoherent, since to know what a human would do in any given circumstance requires the full knowledge
of their character, and thus the being necessarily exists in the mind of God prior to the knowledge of their
counterfactuals and their physical existence, refuting the basis of Molinistic libertarian free will and
divine benevolence.
Christian theology has a storied history of debating the coexistence of divine
omniscience and omnipotence with divine benevolence and human free will. The
basic problem is that if God has perfect knowledge of the future, and decides to
materialize the world in his mind, he is the author of evil and humans are unable to
deviate from His will. These are conflated issues so we can separate them and
briefly look at each independently. The schematic of the origin of evil can be
ordered as such:
1) God, in His omnipotence, can create any world He desires.
2) God desires to create Earth beginning with Adam and Eve.
3) His omniscience means He knows that if He creates Adam and Eve with the
composition He desires, they will disobey Him and sin.
4) God creates this world, with the foreknowledge of their fall.
5) Given premise (1) that God could create any world with any characteristics, but that
He (2) created humans with a composition capable of (3) sin, and then (4) foresaw this
sin yet created such a world anyways, God is the author of evil.
Various reconciliatory attempts were made in early Christianity to explain the
origins of evil, yet many contemporary reformed theologians continue to assert:
Adam and Eve were not created fallen. They had no sin nature. They were good creatures
with a free will. Yet they chose to sin. Why? I don’t know. Nor have I found anyone yet
who does know. In spite of this excruciating problem we still must affirm that God is not
the author of sin...I know that God ordained the Fall, but I do not know how this
ordination enabled Adam and his descendants to fall into sin without the Lord himself
being the direct, culpable agent for the Fall.1
1 R.C. Sproul, Chosen by God, Tyndale Elevate (April 6, 2021), pp. 17, 166.
A schematic of the conflict between divine omniscience and free will is related, but
more succinctly ordered:
1) God’s omniscience means he foreknows every decision that would be made any
potential world.
2) God materialized our world knowing exactly what would happen.
3) For God to know what would happen in our world, premise (1 & 2), requires Him to
fix decisions in time, consequently there is no ability to deviate from this foreordination,
or God would have knowledge of it. There is thus no libertarian free will.
This schematic can be epitomized by Augustine’s distinction between free
will and liberty, and was generally accepted until the counter-reformation.2
In the sixteenth century, Luis De Molina, attempting to rescue libertarian freedom
from reformed theological conceptions of divine providence, devised a schema
about the knowledge God possesses prior to creation. In modern terminology,
Molina posited that in addition to God’s natural knowledge, knowledge about
necessary truths, and free knowledge, His perfect foreknowledge of the future in
the materialized world, He also possesses middle knowledge, which is what any
creature would freely do in any given circumstances.3
Middle knowledge is effectively “a knowledge of all the things that logically could
happen”4 and is comprised of counterfactual statements, “a subjunctive conditional
stating what would be done freely by a certain possible creature (or by more than
one) under certain possible circumstances.”5
Knowledge of counterfactuals enables God to create a world in which he
foreordains His will through the use of libertarian free humans who are placed in
circumstances where He knows they will freely choose His desired outcome.
Beyond salvaging liberty, proponents claim it also solves the problem of the origin
of evil, since humans are still the agents that freely bring evil into existence.
The structured contemporary argument for Molinism is such:6
2 Boethius, The Consolation of Philosophy, Translated with an Introduction and Notes by Richard Green,
Macmillan Publishing Company (1962), p. xix.
3 Robert Merrihew Adams, “An Anit-Molinist Argument,” Philosophical Perspectives, 1991, Vol. 5, Philosophy
of Religion (1991), p. 343.
4 David Paul Hunt, “The ‘Foreknowledge Defense’,” International Journal for Philosophy of Religion, Aug.,
1990, Vol. 28, No. 1 (Aug., 1990), pp. 2-3.
5 Robert Merrihew Adams, p. 344, emphasis original to quotation.
6 William Lane Craig, “On Behalf of a Molinist Perspective | Gracepoint Church - San Francisco,” Reasonable
Faith, June 11, 2020.
1) If there are true counterfactuals of creaturely freedom, then God knows these truths.
2) There are true counterfactuals of creaturely freedom.
3) If God knows true counterfactuals of creaturely freedom, God knows them either
logically prior to the divine creative decree or only logically posterior to the divine
creative decree.
4) Counterfactuals of creaturely freedom cannot be known only logically posterior to the
divine creative decree.
5) From (1) and (2) it follows logically that God knows true counterfactuals of creaturely
freedom.
6) From (3) and (5) it follows logically that God knows true counterfactuals of creaturely
freedom either logically prior to the divine creative decree or only logically posterior to
the divine creative decree.
7) From (4) and (6) it follows logically that God knows true counterfactuals of creaturely
freedom logically prior to the divine creative decree.
It is absolutely necessary to the Molinist that counterfactuals are true prior to the
divine decree and not
true only logically posterior to the divine decree because that makes God the author of
evil. In that case, God is the one who determines how creatures would act in any of these
circumstances and therefore, by the very nature of the case, these counterfactuals of
creaturely freedom must be true if they are true logically prior to the divine decree.7
Most critics of this formulation attack the apparent lack of grounding of the truth
of these counterfactuals.8 This critique generally goes:
1) If counterfactuals are true prior to the divine decree, they are not true based on the
actions of the agent, since they are not yet created.
2) For libertarian free will to exist, “God does not determine what free creatures would do
in any situation in which they find themselves. He takes hands off, so to speak, and says,
‘okay, you make the decision.’”9
3) From premise (1) and (2) it logically follows that these truths have no grounding and
cannot be said to exist, thus refuting the coherence of Molinism.
7 Ibid.
8 Robert Merrihew Adams, p. 345.
9 William Lane Craig, “William Lane Craig vs James White - Calvinism vs Molinism on the Problem of Evil,”
Premier Unbelievable, December 3, 2021.
One can see how if the Molinist case was proper, the grounding objection would be
a sufficient refutation, for claiming that God must be good is not philosophical
justification for why counterfactuals must be true prior to creation.10
Though the grounding objection is appealing, upon closer examination it is flawed
in composition, yet generally correct in deduction, and Molinism is
compositionally accurate, yet flawed in deduction.
The true error of Molinism rests primarily in the nature of counterfactuals. The
Molinist schema is sound because it is true that God does know counterfactuals
prior to physical creation. It is unsound because it is not possible to know
counterfactuals prior to the conception of the identical entity. Think of the
counterfactual: “If Jenna was in love with Anthony, she would agree to marry
him.” In order for something to be said about Jenna, there must be a Jenna.
This is to say that regardless of the truth origins of counterfactuals, God’s
knowledge of them are always explanatorily posterior to God’s mental creation of
the agents, which is fatal to the Molinist argument.
In addition to the middle knowledge proposed by Molinists, there must be a sub
middle knowledge, which is the knowledge of the entities God desires to create.
Think again to Jenna; there are a multitude of circumstances outside Jenna’s
control which invariably determine the libertarian counterfactuals of her love. If
Jenna was born to an aboriginal tribe in the Republic of the Congo, she would
never meet Anthony. If she was 7 feet tall, and she prefers taller men, she would
not love Anthony. If she were born with a desire for blonde haired men, she would
not love Anthony. From these examples it can be seen that counterfactuals depend
on the characteristics of the individual that God creates.
For a counterfactual to have meaning, God first must conceive of an individual,
with all of their characteristics and dispositions in tact. God then can decide how to
place this individual in circumstances along with other pre-conceived individuals.
This means that God’s mental creation would necessarily have to be identical to
His physical creation; God thinks of a person, evaluates the feasibility of their
integration into His plan, and would either change the individual’s characteristics,
not integrate them, or use that exact conception. There is no coherent formulation
where God logically knows counterfactuals of a non-conceived being. Is libertarian
10 A distinction is made between philosophical validity and validity within a holistic Christian framework. If the
Bible is viewed infallibly and it is determined to teach that God is good, than goodness does become a
justifiable axiom.
freedom maintained? Most likely not, and at the cost of God’s authorship of evil,
making Molinism an untenable position for any conventional Christian.
Interestingly, contemporary Molinists acknowledge this conceptional stage of
God’s creation, but do not explain how mental creation is qualitatively different
from physical creation in God’s culpability of evil.11
The accurate reworking of the Molinist schema, and its refutation, is as follows:
1) If there are true counterfactuals of creaturely freedom, then God knows these truths.
2) There are true counterfactuals of creaturely freedom.
3) If God knows true counterfactuals of creaturely freedom, God knows them either
logically prior to the agent’s conception in God’s mind or only logically posterior.
4) Counterfactuals of creaturely freedom cannot be known logically prior to God first
conceiving of the creature.
5) From (1) and (2) it follows logically that God knows true counterfactuals of creaturely
freedom.
6) From (3) and (5) it follows logically that God knows true counterfactuals of creaturely
freedom logically posterior to His mental conception of a creature.
