Introduction

Since the mid-twentieth-century, the practice of women veiling in Church has significantly declined. The Code of Canon Law of 1983 makes no explicit mention of a requirement to veil, the Catechism of the Catholic Church provides no discussion on women veiling, and the former Prefect of the Apostolic Signatura is on record claiming that there is no requirement to veil at the Mass.i In retort to these modern developments, this paper presents a deductive argument demonstrating that women must veil during Mass and that any contrary promulgations are invalid, as they would lead the Church into error.

Background

Deductive arguments are structured presentations of premises, i.e. statements, which intend to logically prove a point. The following deductive argument is presented as both valid and sound, defined so that “a valid deductive argument is one whose logical structure or form is such that if the premises are true, the conclusion must be true. A sound argument is a valid argument with true premises.”ii Hence, if the premises (1-7) are true, then the conclusions (8-11) must be true. Disputing a conclusion requires demonstrating that a premise is untrue or the composition of the argument is invalid.

Argument

    1. God never lies.
    2. The Holy Spirit is God.
    3. The Holy Spirit authored the Bible.
    4. In Chapter 11 of The First Letter to the Corinthians, St. Paul says that women should be veiled when they pray.
    5. Chapter 11 of The First Letter to the Corinthians is part of the canonical Bible.
    6. In every Mass, prayer occurs.
    7. The Catholic Church cannot promulgate error.
    8. Given premises 1-3, the Bible is infallible.
    9. Given premises 4, 5, and 8, The First Letter to the Corinthians infallibly says that women should be veiled when they pray.
    10. Given premises 6 and 9, women should be veiled at Mass.
    11. Given premises 7 and 10, the Church cannot contradict St. Paul by saying women do not have to veil at Mass.
Defense of Premises

Premise 1 — God never lies.

That God does not lie is affirmed by Scripture, inferred from Scripture, and taught in the Catechism of the Catholic Church.1 The foremost scriptural attestation is in the Letter to the Hebrews, where God “swore by himself” that the promise to multiply Abraham’s descendants was true. iii The Letter explains that through the promise and oath, “by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we who have taken refuge might be strongly encouraged to hold fast to the hope that lies before us.”iv While the author clearly states that it is “impossible for God to lie,” he also describes both God’s promise and oath as “immutable,” meaning unchangeable. If God’s words are unchangeable, it necessitates that they are equally valid throughout time and space, which is to say His words are objectively true and not only true within specific circumstances.

Scriptural inferences that God never lies come from declarations of His truth and trustworthiness. The Book of Wisdom proclaims, “but you, our God, are good and true.”v In agreement, the Second Book of Samuel states, “you, Lord GOD, are truly God and your words are truth,”vi and the Psalmist writes “all the paths of the LORD are mercy and truth.”vii Since lies entail falsehood, and that which is true cannot be false, when Scripture declares God to be true it necessitates that He therefore does not lie. Proverbs also instructs us that “lying lips are an abomination to the LORD, but those who are truthful, his delight.”viii Since “the LORD is good,”ix He cannot do what is an abomination to Him, or else He would not be good. Therefore, because lying is “an abomination,” God does not lie. 

God’s perfect trustworthiness also requires that He never lie. Psalm 145 states that “the LORD is trustworthy in all his words”x and the Book of Proverbs clarifies that “a trustworthy witness does not lie.”xi In order for God to be trustworthy, He cannot lie, or else it would not be possible to trust whether He was telling the truth. Since He is trustworthy, and trustworthy witnesses do not lie, God does not lie.

Lastly, the Catechism declares that God never lies. CCC 215 states, “God is Truth itself, whose words cannot deceive. This is why one can abandon oneself in full trust to the truth and faithfulness of his word in all things.”xii Furthermore, CCC 214 states, “in all his works God displays not only his kindness, goodness, grace, and steadfast love, but also his trustworthiness, constancy, faithfulness, and truth.”xiii If “God is Truth itself,” then He would never lie, as that would cause a logical contradiction; if “in all his works” he displays truth, then it is Catholic doctrine that everything He says is true.

It is important to note that for the Catholic, only one of the defenses of Premise 1 must be valid. Catholic doctrine and Scripture cannot contradict, and “both Scripture and Tradition must be accepted and honored with equal sentiments of devotion and reverence.”xiv Consequently, if the critic cannot demonstrate that both Scripture and Catholic doctrine teach that God lies, then the premise is sound.

Premise 2 – The Holy Spirit is God.

The Catechism states, “‘the infallibility promised to the Church is also present in the body of bishops when, together with Peter’s successor, they exercise the supreme Magisterium,’ above all in an Ecumenical Council.”xv Thus, all teachings of faith promulgated by an ecumenical council are infallible, and multiple ecumenical councils have promulgated that the Holy Spirit is God.

The bishops at the third ecumenical council declared, “the Father, the Son and the holy Spirit have a single Godhead and power and substance, a dignity deserving the same honour and a co-eternal sovereignty, in three most perfect hypostases, or three perfect persons”xvi and the council officially declared the Pneumatomachi, those who denied the co-equal Godhood of the Holy Spirit, to be heretics: 

Every heresy is to be anathematised and in particular that of the Eunomians or Anomoeans, that of the Arians or Eudoxians, that of the Semi-Arians or Pneumatomachi, that of the Sabellians that of the Marcellians, that of the Photinians and that of the Apollinarians.xvii

The First Constitution of the ecumenical Fourth Lateran Council then positively states the Holy Spirit’s co-equal Godhood:

We firmly believe and simply confess that there is only one true God, eternal and immeasurable, almighty, unchangeable, incomprehensible and ineffable, Father, Son and holy Spirit, three persons but one absolutely simple essence, substance or nature. The Father is from none, the Son from the Father alone, and the holy Spirit from both equally, eternally without beginning or end; the Father generating, the Son being born, and the holy Spirit proceeding; consubstantial and coequal, co-omnipotent and coeternal.xviii

The Holy Spirit’s Godhood is also declared in the Catechism. CCC 233 states, “for there is only God, the almighty Father, his only Son, and the Holy Spirit: the most Holy Trinity,”xix and CCC 243 states, “the Holy Spirit is thus revealed as another divine person with Jesus and the Father.”xx Therefore, the Catechism and infallible ecumenical councils prove that the Holy Spirit is God.

Premise 3 – The Holy Spirit authored the Bible. 

There are two primary Biblical proof texts to demonstrate the Holy Spirit’s authorship of scripture: 2 Timothy 3:16 and 2 Peter 1:20-21. In the Second Letter to Timothy, St. Paul writes, “all scripture is inspired by God and is useful for teaching, for refutation, for correction, and for training in righteousness.”xxi To Paul, God is the author of scripture who uses the writer as His collaborator, “thus the scriptures are the word of God in human language.”xxii In 2 Peter 1:20-21, St. Peter writes, “know this first of all, that there is no prophecy of scripture that is a matter of personal interpretation, for no prophecy ever came through human will; but rather human beings moved by the holy Spirit spoke under the influence of God.”xxiii Here, St. Peter explains that the content of scripture is not produced from the author’s will, but from what the Holy Spirit desired to communicate.

The Holy Spirit’s authorship of scripture appears to be one of the few non-disputed points in early Christianity. One of the oldest, genuine, extant, non-canonical documents is St. Clement I’s First Epistle to the Corinthians, where he remarks that “ye have searched the scriptures, which are true, which were given through the Holy Ghost.”xxiv This perspective was declared as infallible doctrine at the ecumenical First Vatican Council, which explained that Scripture’s sanctity is derived from God’s authorship through the Holy Spirit:

These books the church holds to be sacred and canonical not because she subsequently approved them by her authority after they had been composed by unaided human skill, nor simply because they contain revelation without error, but because, being written under the inspiration of the holy Spirit, they have God as their author, and were as such committed to the church.xxv

The Second Vatican Council issued a nearly identical statement in the Dogmatic Constitution on Divine Revelation, Dei Verbum:

For holy mother Church, relying on the belief of the Apostles (see John 20:31; 2 Tim. 3:16; 2 Peter 1:19-20, 3:15-16), holds that the books of both the Old and New Testaments in their entirety, with all their parts, are sacred and canonical because written under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, they have God as their author and have been handed on as such to the Church herself.xxvi

The same truth is extolled in the Catechism, as CCC 105 states, “God is the author of Sacred Scripture.2 ‘The divinely revealed realities, which are contained and presented in the text of Sacred Scripture, have been written down under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit’”xxvii and CCC 107 states, 

the inspired books teach the truth. ‘Since therefore all that the inspired authors or sacred writers affirm should be regarded as affirmed by the Holy Spirit, we must acknowledge that the books of Scripture firmly, faithfully, and without error teach that truth which God, for the sake of our salvation wished to see confided to the Sacred Scriptures.xxviii 

Through scripture, our earliest extra-canonical documents, ecumenical councils, and the Catechism, it is established Catholic doctrine that Holy Spirit is the author of Scripture.

Premise 4 – In Chapter 11 of The First Letter to the Corinthians, St. Paul says that women should be veiled when they pray.

That it was the custom for Jewish women to veil in the first century is demonstrable from the imagery of the era. For example, in all portraits of the Virgin Mary, she is always portrayed with a covering. We also have extant Jewish writings that a woman could have her marriage payment confiscated, should she be divorced, if she “goes out with her hair flowing loose.”xxix 

Though the requirement to veil is not explicitly mentioned in the Torah, we have evidence from the Liber Pontificalis that veiling was codified from Christianity’s inception, when “on St. Peter’s instruction” the second pope, St. Linus, “decreed that a woman should have her head covered when entering church.”xxx A preserved apostolic instruction from Christ’s closest disciple, and subsequent order by St. Linus, is strong grounds for enforcing the requirement to veil, but fortunately, we have a far better attested apostolic order in the canon of Scripture.

In the eleventh chapter of St. Paul’s First Letter to the Corinthians, St. Paul commands women to be veiled when they pray:

But I want you to know that Christ is the head of every man, and a husband the head of his wife, and God the head of Christ. Any man who prays or prophesies with his head covered brings shame upon his head. But any woman who prays or prophesies with her head unveiled brings shame upon her head, for it is one and the same thing as if she had had her head shaved. For if a woman does not have her head veiled, she may as well have her hair cut off. But if it is shameful for a woman to have her hair cut off or her head shaved, then she should wear a veil.

A man, on the other hand, should not cover his head, because he is the image and glory of God, but woman is the glory of man. For man did not come from woman, but woman from man; nor was man created for woman, but woman for man; for this reason a woman should have a sign of authority on her head, because of the angels. Woman is not independent of man or man of woman in the Lord. For just as woman came from man, so man is born of woman; but all things are from God.

Judge for yourselves: is it proper for a woman to pray to God with her head unveiled? Does not nature itself teach you that if a man wears his hair long it is a disgrace to him, whereas if a woman has long hair it is her glory, because long hair has been given [her] for a covering? But if anyone is inclined to be argumentative, we do not have such a custom, nor do the churches of God.xxxi

While it has been argued that Paul is urging the Corinthians to maintain the social customs of the time period, this contradicts the text. St. Paul explicitly provides two reasons that women are required to veil: 1) “woman is the glory of man...nor was man created for woman, but woman for man” and 2) “because of the angels.” 

The first reason is woman’s subordination to man. St. Paul states that man should not wear a covering “because he is the image and glory of God.” He contrasts this with the requirement for females to cover since “woman is the glory of man.” St. Paul uses this contrast as a rhetorical tool to demonstrate that the veil is related to woman’s place in the natural order, which is under man, as man is under God. As the New American Bible Revised Edition explains, “the connection with v. 9 indicates that the covering is a sign of woman’s subordination.”xxxii Hence, from this first justification, it is shown that St. Paul does not issue the veiling requirement as a cultural instruction, but rather as a demonstration of the divine ordering of the sexes, something which is unrelated to cultural subjectivities.

The second reason, “because of the angels,” is unclear, and St. Paul provides no further clarification. It may be another reference to the divine ordering of the sexes, or it may be “the reference is to cosmic powers who might inflict harm on women or whose function is to watch over women.”xxxiii Regardless, there is no indication that the angelic justification would relate to culture, nor would it abrogate the first justification of woman’s subordination.

There is also an inferential defeater of the cultural explanation for the requirement to veil; namely, St. Paul mentions that in none of “the churches of God” “is it proper for a woman to pray to God with her head unveiled.” So, this requirement applies not only to the Greeks but to all the churches.  

Finally, throughout St. Paul’s letter, he instructs the Corinthians to go against the Greek culture. For example, Corinth was a pagan town, and the Corinthians were primarily former pagans.xxxiv In pagan Greece, “religious office presented the one arena in which Greek women assumed roles equal and comparable to those of men,”xxxv yet St. Paul is adamant that women are not allowed to be leaders in the church: “as in all the churches of the holy ones, women should keep silent in the churches, for they are not allowed to speak, but should be subordinate, as even the law says.”xxxvi Additionally, despite the Corinthian custom to consume sacrificial meat, if it was made known to a church-member that their food was offered in sacrifice, they were to refrain from consuming it.xxxvii Finally, “ancient Greek and Roman men veiled themselves in some liturgical settings, for sacrifices and worship practices, to demonstrate deference to the gods. Both men and women veiled themselves in situations of high emotion, notably anger and grief.”xxxviii So, St. Paul’s injunction for men to universally pray with their heads uncovered also represented a departure from the customs of first-century pagan Greece.

The Church Fathers’ expositions of St. Paul’s letter universally affirm that St. Paul ordered women to veil. Tertullian lived between A.D. 155 to A.D. 220, and in Chapter 7 of his essay, On the Veiling of Virgins, he wrote:

Turn we next to the examination of the reasons themselves which lead the apostle to teach that the female ought to be veiled, (to see) whether the self-same (reasons) apply to virgins likewise; so that hence also the community of the name between virgins and not-virgins may be established, while the self-same causes which necessitate the veil are found to exist in each case.

If "the man is head of the woman," of course (he is) of the virgin too, from whom comes the woman who has married; unless the virgin is a third generic class, some monstrosity with a head of its own. If "it is shameful for a woman to be shaven or shorn," of course it is so for a virgin. (Hence let the world, the rival of God, see to it, if it asserts that close-cut hair is graceful to a virgin in like manner as that flowing hair is to a boy.) To her, then, to whom it is equally unbecoming to be shaven or shorn, it is equally becoming to be covered. If "the woman is the glory of the man," how much more the virgin, who is a glory withal to herself! If "the woman is of the man," and "for the sake of the man," that rib of Adam was first a virgin. If "the woman ought to have power upon the head," all the more justly ought the virgin, to whom pertains the essence of the cause (assigned for this assertion).xxxix

Tertullian’s primary focus is to demonstrate that St. Paul’s requirement to veil applies to all women, not just those who are married. Since “man is head of the woman,” he is also the head of non-married women; since it is at all times shameful for women to have shaved heads, it is at all times virtuous for them to be veiled, and since “the woman ought to have power upon the head,” all women should be veiled. Tertullian interprets St. Paul like the text naturally reads, “that the female ought to be veiled.” This becomes even clearer in Chapter 8, 

The contraries, at all events, of all these (considerations) effect that a man is not to cover his head: to wit, because he has not by nature been gifted with excess of hair; because to be shaven or shorn is not shameful to him; because it was not on his account that the angels transgressed; because his Head is Christ. Accordingly, since the apostle is treating of man and woman----why the latter ought to be veiled, but the former not----it is apparent why he has been silent as to the virgin; allowing, to wit, the virgin to be understood in the woman by the self-same reason by which he forbore to name the boy as implied in the man; embracing the whole order of either sex in the names proper (to each) of woman and man. So likewise Adam, while still intact, is surnamed in Genesis man: "She shall be called," says he, "woman, because she hath been taken from her own man." Thus was Adam a man before nuptial intercourse, in like manner as Eve a woman. On either side the apostle has made his sentence apply with sufficient plainness to the universal species of each sex; and briefly and fully, with so well-appointed a definition, he says, " Every woman." What is "every," but of every class, of every order, of every condition, of every dignity, of every age?----if, (as is the case), "every" means total and entire, and in none of its parts defective. But the virgin is withal a part of the woman. Equally, too, with regard to not veiling the man, he says "every." Behold two diverse names, Man and woman----"every one" in each case: two laws, mutually distinctive; on the one hand (a law) of veiling, on the other (a law) of baring. Therefore, if the fact that it is said "every man" makes it plain that the name of man is common even to him who is not yet a man, a stripling male; (if), moreover, since the name is common according to nature, the law of not veiling him who among men is a virgin is common too according to discipline: why is it that it is not consequently prejudged that, woman being named, every woman-virgin is similarly comprised in the fellowship of the name, so as to be comprised too in the community of the law? If a virgin is not a woman, neither is a stripling a man. If the virgin is not covered on the plea that she is not a woman, let the stripling be covered on the plea that he is not a man. Let identity of virginity, share equality of indulgence. As virgins are not compelled to be veiled, so let boys not be bidden to be unveiled. Why do we partly acknowledge the definition of the apostle, as absolute with regard to "every man," without entering upon disquisitions as to why he has not withal named the boy; but partly prevaricate, though it is equally absolute with regard to "every woman?" "If any," he says, "is contentious, we have not such a custom, nor (has) the Church of God." He shows that there had been some contention about this point; for the extinction whereof he uses the whole compendiousness (of language): not naming the virgin, on the one hand, in order to show that there is to be no doubt about her veiling; and, on the other hand, naming "every woman," whereas he would have named the virgin (had the question been confined to her). So, too, did the Corinthians themselves understand him. In fact, at this day the Corinthians do veil their virgins. What the apostles taught, their disciples approve.xl

Tertullian argues that St. Paul instituted “two laws,” the law of veiling for women, and the law of “baring” for men. These universal laws apply to “every class, of every order, of every condition, of every dignity.” To prove the point that this is what St. Paul truly meant, writing 150 years after St. Paul’s First Letter to the Corinthians, Tertullian points out that all Christian women in Corinth veil. 

Clement of Alexandria lived between A.D. 150 and A.D. 220, was a presbyter of the church, and was the head of the famed Catechetical School of Alexandria.xli One of his three main works, The Instructor, was “addressed to those who have been rescued from the darkness and pollutions of heathenism, and is an exhibition of Christian morals and manners.”xlii The third book of The Instructor lays “down rules for the regulation of the Christian, in all the relations, circumstances, and actions of life...in all respects agreeable to the Word.”xliii It is from this book, in his section “Going to Church,” where Clement instructs that women must veil in accordance with the Word:

Woman and man are to go to church decently attired, with natural step, embracing silence, possessing unfeigned love, pure in body, pure in heart, fit to pray to God. Let the woman observe this, further. Let her be entirely covered, unless she happen to be at home. For that style of dress is grave, and protects from being gazed at. And she will never fall, who puts before her eyes modesty, and her shawl; nor will she invite another to fall into sin by uncovering her face. For this is the wish of the Word, since it is becoming for her to pray veiled.xliv 

The reference to “the wish of the Word,” succeeded by the statement “it is becoming for her to pray veiled” is a clear reference to St. Paul. Clement is more explicit in his interpretation of 1 Corinthians 11 in his other seminal work, The Stromata, written “to furnish the materials for the construction of a true gnosis, a Christian philosophy,” in which he states:xlv

“Because of the angels.” By the angels he means righteous and virtuous men. Let her be
veiled then, that she may not lead them to stumble into fornication. For the real angels in
heaven see her though veiled.xlvi

Clement’s explanation for “because of the angels” is that the angels symbolize “righteous and virtuous men,” and women must veil to protect men from the temptation of fornication. For, to Clement, true divine angels can see through veils and, therefore, would not benefit from their use.

St. Hippolytus may have been Clement’s student,xlvii and wrote The Apostolic Tradition in A.D. 215 in order that “all who hear the apostolic tra[dition] and keep it, no heretics or any other man will prevail to lead them astray.”xlviii In Part II of this work, Hippolytus states that “all the women” “whether believers or catechumens” should have their heads covered with a substantial cloth:

When the teacher finishes his instruction, the catechumens shall pray by themselves, apart from the believers. And [all] women, whether believers or catechumens, shall stand for their prayers by themselves in a separate part of the church.
And when [the catechumens] finish their prayers, they must not give the kiss of peace, for their kiss is not yet pure. Only believers shall salute one another, but men with men and women with women; a man shall not salute a woman.
And let all the women have their heads covered with an opaque cloth, not with a veil of thin linen, for this is not a true covering.xlix

While St. Hippolytus does not name St. Paul, by including the order to veil in The Apostolic Tradition, he views the requirement to have an apostolic origin. Since St. Paul’s First Letter to the Corinthians is the only New Testament text requiring women to veil, it is most probable that St. Hippolytus derived the requirement from St. Paul. Circumstantial evidence to support this view is the reality that direct biblical references were sparse among the church fathers in general, as the Doctor of Divinity, W.K.L. Clarke, remarked, “the older editions of the Fathers are notoriously unsatisfactory as regards biblical quotations.”l

Origen of Alexandria lived between A.D. 185 and A.D. 254 and is one of the most prolific authors in Christian history. Origen often wrote in highly allegorical language, and his exegesis on 1 Corinthians 11 is highly nuanced: 

Paul says: “Beholding the glory of the Lord with unveiled faces.” Therefore, there are two faces, the veiling and the veiled, the exterior and the interior. We call the face the opsis, and the opsis “the visions.” Therefore, we have both the exterior opsis and the interior opsis. The interior vision is the mind. And the intellectual “face” is the mind, which one must set firmly in place, so that it will be able to assist the word / reason...For there were women in Israel who taught those who received them shameful things, there were [indeed]; by the same token, the Scripture knows women who had no masculine quality in their bearing. For a soul which exercises its “ruling” or “thinking” faculty and by-passes the matter which is “under generation” and destruction is not a woman but a man; but one which takes its seat in sense-perception and takes pleasure in the material world, being as it were feminized, is a woman. The mind is a man; sense-perception is a woman, in accordance with the purpose of one’s bearing. To whatever sort of thing a soul inclines, it takes on its quality. For this reason, the woman has a covering on her head on account of the angels; for she is underneath.li

Origen appears to view the unveiled face as a symbol of the intellect’s capacity to subdue the desires of the “‘under-generation’...which takes its seat in sense-perception and takes pleasure in the physical world.” This intellect, which Origen refers to as the mind, is man, and the sense perception, which is of a lower form than reason, is woman. For this reason, Origen interprets St. Paul’s injunction to veil as signifying woman’s submission to the divine order, derived from the higher inclinations of man’s soul, which is closer to God. What is clear is that from St. Paul’s letter, Origen believes women are to veil and ascribes his reasoning to permanent conditions outside of culture, such as the nature of the soul and the divine ordering of the sexes.

St. Basil the Great lived between A.D. 329 and A.D. 379, was the Bishop of Cappadocia, and is a Doctor of the Church.lii He also was prestigiously mentioned as a holy father during the first session of the ecumenical Council of Chalcedon.liii In his homily on drunkenness, St. Basil extols the moral issues of the age, condemning unveiling in the process:liv

Dissolute women, forgetting the fear of God, despising the everlasting fire, on a day when they should have remained at home to remember the resurrection and to take thought of that day when the heavens shall be opened and our Judge shall appear from heaven, and of God's trumpets, and of the resurrection of the dead, and the just judgment, and the retribution to every one according to his works – instead of having these things in their thoughts, and purging their hearts from evil desires, and washing their past sins away with tears, and making ready to meet Christ at the great day of His appearing – they shook off the yoke of Christ's service, they tore from their heads the veil of modesty, they despised God and His angels, they shamelessly faced the gaze of every male, shook out their hair, trailed their tunics, and with tripping feet, with wanton eyes, and peals of laughter, dancing like Bacchanals, inviting all the licentiousness of young men, arranged their dances in the very churches of the martyrs before the city walls and made the holy places themselves the workshops of their impurity.lv 

St. Basil views women unveiling as despising “God and His angels,” a reference to St. Paul’s letter, as the translator notes: “this passage shows us what was Basil’s interpretation of 1 Cor. xi. 10.”lvi St. Basil is more precise in his work The Morals, written with the purpose to aggregate all the rules “we find in the New Testament in scattered passages forbidden or approved.”lvii It is in Rule 56 where he orders that:
 
A man must not pray or prophesy with his head covered, or a woman with hers uncovered.lviii

St. John Chrysostom lived between A.D. 347 and A.D. 407 and is a Doctor of the Church. He speaks of the requirement to veil in many places, two of which come from his Homily 26 on First Corinthians. First, discussing 1 Corinthians 11:4-5, St. Chrysostom writes:

But the woman he commands to be at all times covered. Wherefore also having said, "Every woman that prays or prophesies with her head unveiled, dishonors her head," he stayed not at this point only, but also proceeded to say, "for it is one and the same thing as if she were shaven." But if to be shaven is always dishonorable, it is plain too that being uncovered is always a reproach. And not even with this only was he content, but added again, saying, "The woman ought to have a sign of authority on her head, because of the angels." He signifies that not at the time of prayer only but also continually, she ought to be covered. But with regard to the man, it is no longer about covering but about wearing long hair, that he so forms his discourse. To be covered he then only forbids, when a man is praying; but the wearing long hair he discourages at all times. Wherefore, as touching the woman, he said, "But if she be not veiled, let her also be shorn;" so likewise touching the man, "If he have long hair, it is a dishonor unto him." He said not, "if he be covered" but, "if he have long hair." Wherefore also he said at the beginning, "Every man praying or prophesying, having anything on his head, dishonors his head." He said not, "covered," but "having anything on his head;" signifying that even though he pray with the head bare, yet if he have long hair, he is like to one covered. "For the hair," says he, "is given for a covering."lix

St. Chrysostom believes that women must veil when they pray and that the requirement is to veil at all times, a stance that many early Christians, such as Tertullian, had but which we do not need to prove for Premise 4 to be correct. It is sufficient to demonstrate that St. Chrysostom’s interpretation of the apostolic command to veil entails the requirement to veil while praying. St. Chrysostom continues in the same homily, discussing 1 Corinthians 11:10, to explain why women must veil according to St. Paul:

"For this cause ought the woman to have a sign of authority on her head." 
"For this cause:" what cause, tell me? "For all these which have been mentioned," says he; or rather not for these only, but also "because of the angels." "For although thou despise your husband," says he, "yet reverence the angels." It follows that being covered is a mark of subjection and authority. For it induces her to look down and be ashamed and preserve entire her proper virtue. For the virtue and honor of the governed is to abide in his obedience. Again: the man is not compelled to do this; for he is the image of his Lord: but the woman is; and that reasonably. Consider then the excess of the transgression when being honored with so high a prerogative, you put yourself to shame, seizing the woman's dress. And you do the same as if having received a diadem, you should cast the diadem from your head, and instead of it take a slave's garment.lx

To St. Chrysostom, St. Paul’s requirement to veil “is a mark of subjection and authority,” and the following justification “because of the angels” refers to the command's divine nature. Even if a woman despises man’s authority, she must respect that God ordered her subjection and veil.

St. Jerome lived between A.D. 345 and A.D. 429, and he is a Doctor of the Church. In his Letter to Sabinianus, he refers to the requirement for women to cover their heads as “the apostle’s command”:

It is usual in the monasteries of Egypt and Syria for virgins and widows who have vowed themselves to God and have renounced the world and have trodden under foot its pleasures, to ask the mothers of their communities to cut their hair; not that afterwards they go about with heads uncovered in defiance of the apostle's command, for they wear a close-fitting cap and a veil.lxi 

St. Jerome speaks about the monasteries in Egypt and Syria and writes in the late fourth and early fifth centuries, so he implicitly believes St. Paul’s command extends beyond the time and space of first-century Greek culture. St. Jerome clarifies that even though these virgins and widows “ask the mothers of their communities to cut their hair” they do not “go about with heads uncovered in defience of the apostle’s command,” i.e., they obey the command to veil.

St. Augustine lived between A.D. 354 and A.D. 430, and he is a Doctor of the Church. In his Letter to Possidius, he explains that all women must keep their heads covered in alignment with St. Paul’s command: 

It requires more consideration to decide what to do with those who refuse to obey you, than to discover how to show them that things which they do are unlawful. Meanwhile, however, the letter of your Holiness has come upon me when I am exceedingly pressed with business, and the very hasty departure of the bearer has made it necessary for me to write you in reply, but has not given me time to answer as I ought to have done in regard to the matters on which you have consulted me. Let me say, however, in regard to ornaments of gold and costly dress, that I would not have you come to a precipitate decision in the way of forbidding their use, except in the case of those who, neither being married nor intending to marry, are bound to consider only how they may please God. But those who belong to the world have also to consider how they may in these things please their wives if they be husbands, their husbands if they be wives; with this limitation, that it is not becoming even in married women to uncover their hair, since the apostle commands women to keep their heads covered.lxii

Though a short letter, St. Augustine, also writing in the late fourth and early fifth centuries, as bishop in North Africa, views the requirement to veil as valid hundreds of years after St. Paul composed The First Letter to the Corinthians, in a different culture, and different part of the world.

St. Paulinus lived between A.D. 354 and A.D. 431 and was the praetorian prefect of Gaul, who became the Bishop of Nola. He was well acquainted with contemporary thinkers, such as St. Augustine and St. Jerome, and around A.D. 400 wrote about the requirement to veil in a letter to Severus:lxiii

Let them realise why Paul ordered their heads to be clothed with a more abundant covering; it is because of the angels,‘ that is, the angels who are ready to seduce them and whom the saints will condemn. For quite wantonly these angels tempt the weaker vessels, just as the serpent assailed not Adam but Eve. So for this reason women are forbidden to teach in church, so that their spirits may not be puffed up and so that they may not dare to gaze on the decrees of wisdom, and then secede’ through becoming haughty with pride. For it would certainly contribute to the confusion of the wicked angels if they saw a woman hiding her feelings in silence on the grounds of ignorance, and by her modest manner revealing the discipline of her understanding, so that the serpent does not dare to approach and tempt her again because he has no hope of beguiling her. Paul’s teaching is relevant here, that a woman ought to cover her head especially in prayer and prophecy.lxiv

In contrast to Clement of Alexandria, St. Paulinus appears to view the veil as efficacious against harmful angels “who are ready to seduce them,” which may be a reference to the angels who had intercourse with human females in Genesis 6.3 St. Paulinus extends the power of the veil beyond sexual protection later in the passage, as he references the temptation of Eve by the devil, so that with her veil,  “silence,” and “by her modest manner,” she dissuades the devil from approaching her.

St. Bonaventure lived between A.D. 1217 and A.D. 1274, and he is a Doctor of the Church. In his work Commentary on the Four Books of Sentences of Master Peter Lombard, St. Bonaventure argues that women cannot be ordained, and cites 1 Corinthians 11 as one of the reasons:

Orders cannot be conferred upon one who does not have a natural capability or aptitude for them; no one has a capability for Orders who does not have the aptitude for a tonsure and crown; and no one has a natural aptitude for this for whom it is fitting always to have the head "veiled." If, then, it is fitting for men alone to pray with head unveiled, but women with head veiled, as is said in the eleventh of the first letter to the Corinthians, and which nature itself teaches, therefore etc. Likewise, no one is capable of taking up Orders who does not bear the image of God, because in this Sacrament man in a certain way becomes God, or divine, while he is made a participant in divine power. But man by reason of his sex is "imago Dei", the image of God, just as it is said in the eleventh [chapter] of the first [letter] to the Corinthians. Therefore in no way can a woman be ordained. Likewise, in Orders spiritual power is given to the ordained; but a woman is not capable of such power, as is said in the second [chapter] of the first [letter] to Timothy: "I do not permit a woman to teach in the church or to rule over man; therefore [she is not capable] of Orders.lxv

St. Bonaventure directly references 1 Corinthians 11 as instructing women to veil, and since she must be veiled in the church, she cannot adorn a tonsure and crown, and therefore cannot be ordained. 

St. Thomas Aquinas lived between A.D. 1225 and A.D. 1274, and he is a Doctor of the Church. In his
Commentary On the First Epistle to the Corinthians, 1200 years after St. Paul authored his command to veil, St. Aquinas interprets St. Paul’s letter to mean that a “woman should always have a covering over her head”:

Then when he says, because of the angels, he gives a third reason, which is taken on the part of the angels, saying: A woman ought to have a veil on her head because of the angels. This can be understood in two ways: in one way about the heavenly angels who are believed to visit congregations of the faithful, especially when the sacred mysteries are celebrated. And therefore at that time women as well as men ought to present themselves honorably and ordinately as reverence to them according to Ps 138 (v. 1): “Before the angels I sing thy praise.” In another way it can be understood in the sense that priests are called angels, inasmuch as proclaim divine things to the people according to Mal (2:7): “For the lips of a priest should guard knowledge, and men should seek instruction from his mouth; for he is the angel of the Lord of hosts.” Therefore, the woman should always have a covering over her head because of the angels, i.e., the priests, for two reasons: first, as reverence toward them, to which it pertains that women should behave honorably before them. Hence it says in Sir (7:30): “With all your might love your maker and do not forsake his priests.” Secondly, for their safety, lest the sight of a woman not veiled excite their concupiscence. Hence it says in Sir (9:5): “Do not look intently at a virgin, lest you stumble and incur penalties for her.”lxvi 

St. Aquinas’ explanation of the angelic justification is unique, as he views it as a reference to angels visiting the congregation or as symbolic language for the priesthood. It is thus less clear whether St. Aquinas means that women should veil at all times in church or at all times universally. If we defer to the less restrictive interpretation of St. Aquinas’ commentary, women must veil when they attend church. 

Nor was the requirement to veil disputed by the great Protestant reformers. Martin Luther lived between A.D. 1483 and A.D. 1546 and, while holding Biblical disputes about central topics such as the nature of free will, never published an alternative interpretation of the Apostle’s requirement to veil. In A.D. 1525, on the fifteenth of January, Luther delivered his “Sermon on Marriage,”

“Women, be subject to your husbands as to the Lord, for the husband is the head of the wife”[Eph. 5:22–23]. Again to the Colossians in the third chapter [3:18]. Because of this, the wife has not been created out of the head, so that she shall not rule over her husband, but be subject and obedient to him. For that reason the wife wears a headdress, that is, the veil on her head, as St. Paul writes in 1. Corinthians in the second chapter, that she is not free but under obedience to her husband. The wife veils herself with a fine, soft veil, spun and sewn out of pretty, soft flax or linen; and she does not wind a coarse bunch of woven fabric or a dirty cloth around her head or mouth. Why does she do this? So that she speaks fine, lovely, friendly words to her husband and not coarse, filthy, scolding words, as the bad wives do who carry a sword in their mouths and afterward get beaten to the edge of town [auf die Scheide]. Therefore, the wife should have the manner of a grapevine, as it says in the 128th Psalm, for this lets itself be bent and directed with a little band of straw, as the vintner desires. Just so should wives let themselves be guided and taught by their husbands, so that the great and coarse blows and strokes are not used. As pious, obedient wives are accustomed to saying, unbeaten is the best. That is now part two, what the wife should do in marriage, namely, that she should be subordinate and obedient to her husband and not undertake or do anything without his consent.lxvii

Despite the mis-referenced chapter, something Luther often was guilty of,4 lxviii he interprets the requirement to veil as a demonstration “that she is not free but under obedience to her husband.” Luther also makes a symbolic comparison between the type of fabric and the manner of speech and demeanor of the woman; a soft veil will produce soft words, and a course veil produces coarse words.

John Calvin, Luther’s French contemporary, lived between A.D. 1509 and A.D. 1564 and is often viewed as a father of modern reformed theology. Calvin discusses St. Paul’s requirement to veil in his Commentary on 1 Corinthians 11:2-16 Regarding Headcoverings:

He says, that as Christ is subject to God as his head, so is the man subject to Christ, and the woman to the man. We shall afterwards see, how he comes to infer from this, that women ought to have their heads covered…Here we have the second proposition—that women ought to have their heads covered when they pray or prophesy; otherwise they dishonor their head. For as the man honors his head by showing his liberty, so the woman, by showing her subjection. Hence, on the other hand, if the woman uncovers her head, she shakes off subjection—involving contempt of her husband…To see a woman shaven is a spectacle that is disgusting and monstrous. Hence we infer that the woman has her hair given her for a covering. Should any one now object, that her hair is enough, as being a natural covering, Paul says that it is not, for it is such a covering as requires another thing to be made use of for covering it…It is asked, whether he speaks of married women exclusively, for there are some that restrict to them what Paul here teaches, on the ground that it does not belong to virgins to be under the authority of a husband. It is however a mistake, for Paul looks beyond this—to God’s eternal law, which has made the female sex subject to the authority of men. On this account all women are born, that they may acknowledge themselves inferior in consequence of the superiority of the male sex. Otherwise it were an inconclusive argument that Paul has drawn from nature, in saying that it were not one whit more seemly for a woman to have her head uncovered than to be shaven—this being applicable to virgins also.lxix

Calvin attributes the duty to veil to the divine ordering of the sexes, and if a woman does not veil, she “shakes off her subjection—involving contempt of her husband.” However, St. Paul’s command does not only apply to married women, “for Paul looks beyond this—to God’s eternal law, which has made the female sex subject to the authority of men.” In line with Catholic orthodoxy, Calvin interprets St. Paul’s command as a universal, eternal injunction.

Beyond the universal interpretation from Catholic and Protestant church fathers that St. Paul established an apostolic command to veil, Canon 1262 of the 1917 Code of Canon Law formally included the requirement for women to cover their heads. 

§ 2. Men, in a church or outside a church, while they are assisting at sacred rites, shall be bare-headed, unless the approved mores of the people or peculiar circumstances of things determine otherwise; women, however, shall have a covered head and be modestly dressed, especially when they approach the table of the Lord.lxx

In A Commentary on the New Code of the Canon Law, published in 1918, The Reverend Bachofen wrote of Canon 1262: “the rule that women should cover their heads is doubtless taken from St. Paul's Epistle. It applies whenever they attend sacred functions, even from a window which separates them from the place of worship.”lxxi

Still, more documents, commentaries, and church orders, such as the Didascalia, require women to veil. However, the point is sufficiently proved by the consensus of the aforementioned eight saints, six Doctors of the Church, Protestant fathers, and the 1917 Code of Canon Law, that St. Paul unequivocally orders women to veil when they pray. 

The point is neither debated by Atheist scholars, such as Dr. Bart Ehrman, who acknowledge the Apostle’s injunction:

Paul maintained that there was still to be a difference between men and women in this world. To eradicate that difference, in Paul’s view, was unnatural and wrong. This is most evident in Paul’s insistence that women in Corinth should continue to wear headcoverings when they prayed and prophesied in the congregation.lxxii

No ancient, orthodox, authoritative source interpreted St. Paul’s First Letter to the Corinthians in any way contrary to requiring women to veil. Arguing against Premise 4 will require the objector to demonstrate how the earliest Christians unanimously misinterpreted St. Paul’s command and how the error proliferated uncorrected in orthodoxy for 1932 years until the 1983 Code of Canon Law went silent on the matter. 

Premise 5 – Chapter 11 of The First Letter to the Corinthians is part of the canonical Bible.

That St. Paul’s First Letter to the Corinthians is part of the canonical Bible is not a debated point, but shall be demonstrated for the purpose of constructing a valid deductive argument. CCC 120 includes the letter in the canon of the New Testament:

It was by the apostolic Tradition that the Church discerned which writings are to be included in the list of the sacred books. This complete list is called the canon of Scripture. It includes 46 books for the Old Testament (45 if we count Jeremiah and Lamentations as one) and 27 for the New.

The Old Testament: Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, 1 and 2 Samuel, 1 and 2 Kings, 1 and 2 Chronicles, Ezra and Nehemiah, Tobit, Judith, Esther, 1 and 2 Maccabees, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, the Song of Songs, the Wisdom of Solomon, Sirach (Ecclesiasticus), Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lamentations, Baruch, Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zachariah and Malachi.

The New Testament: the Gospels according to Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, the Acts of the Apostles, the Letters of St. Paul to the Romans, 1 and 2 Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, 1 and 2 Thessalonians, 1 and 2 Timothy, Titus, Philemon, the Letter to the Hebrews, the Letters of James, 1 and 2 Peter, 1, 2 and 3 John, and Jude, and Revelation (the Apocalypse).

The Fourth Session of the ecumenical General Council of Trent reaffirmed this list:

And it has thought it meet that a list of the sacred books be inserted in this decree, lest a doubt may arise in any one’s mind, which are the books that are received by this Synod. They are as set down here below: of the Old Testament: the five books of Moses, to wit, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy; Josue, Judges, Ruth, four books of Kings, two of Paralipomenon, the first book of Esdras, and the second which is entitled Nehemias; Tobias, Judith, Esther, Job, the Davidical Psalter, consisting of a hundred and fifty psalms; the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, the Canticle of Canticles, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Isaias, Jeremias, with Baruch; Ezechiel, Daniel; the twelve minor prophets, to wit, Osee, Joel, Amos, Abdias, Jonas, Micheas, Nahum, Habacuc, Sophonias, Aggaeus, Zacharias, Malachias; two books of the Machabees, the first and the second. Of the New Testament: the four Gospels, according to Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John; the Acts of the Apostles written by Luke the Evangelist; fourteen epistles of Paul the apostle, (one) to the Romans, two to the Corinthians, (one) to the Galatians, to the Ephesians, to the Philippians, to the Colossians, two to the Thessalonians, two to Timothy, (one) to Titus, to Philemon, to the Hebrews; two of Peter the apostle, three of John the apostle, one of the apostle James, one of Jude the apostle, and the Apocalypse of John the apostle. But if any one receive not, as sacred and canonical, the said books entire with all their parts, as they have been used to be read in the Catholic Church, and as they are contained in the old Latin vulgate edition; and knowingly and deliberately contemn the traditions aforesaid; let him be anathema.lxxiii

That the entirety of the letter is canonical and inspired was stated at the ecumenical First Vatican Council in Canon 2.4:

If anyone does not receive as sacred and canonical the complete books of sacred scripture with all their parts, as the holy council of Trent listed them, or denies that they were divinely inspired: let him be anathema.lxxiv

Consequently, the Catechism and ecumenical councils concur that 1 Corinthians 11 is inspired scripture. While issues of textual criticism are not dealt with, it should be pointed out that 1 Corinthians 11’s authenticity is not disputed, as textual expert Dr. Bart Ehrman notes, “it’s almost certainly original to Paul.”lxxv

Premise 6 – In every Mass, prayer occurs.

The Catechism twice defines prayer as “the raising of one’s mind and heart to God or the requesting of good things from God.”lxxvi In every Mass, there is an inherent “raising of one’s mind and heart to God” when one joins the community of the Church to worship God. According to the Catechism, there are also concrete times when prayer is explicitly involved in the Mass.

CCC 1163 states, “once each week, on the day which she has called the Lord's Day, she keeps the memory of the Lord's resurrection.”lxxvii This means that on every Sunday, the Sacrament of the Eucharist is conducted. During this Sunday Mass,

The Epiclesis ("invocation upon") is the intercession in which the priest begs the Father to send the Holy Spirit, the Sanctifier, so that the offerings may become the body and blood of Christ and that the faithful by receiving them, may themselves become a living offering to God.lxxviii

CCC 1109 proceeds to define the Epiclesis:

The epiclesis is also a prayer for the full effect of the assembly's communion with the mystery of Christ. "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit" have to remain with us always and bear fruit beyond the Eucharistic celebration. The Church therefore asks the Father to send the Holy Spirit to make the lives of the faithful a living sacrifice to God by their spiritual transformation into the image of Christ, by concern for the Church's unity, and by taking part in her mission through the witness and service of charity.lxxix

Hence, every Sunday, Epiclesis, “a prayer for the full effect of the assembly’s communion with the mystery of Christ,” occurs. Furthermore, CCC 1165 states that “when the Church celebrates the mystery of Christ, there is a word that marks her prayer: "Today!" - a word echoing the prayer her Lord taught her and the call of the Holy Spirit.”lxxx

The Catechism also makes it clear that the liturgy of the word and Eucharist are sources of prayer, and are prayer, not just for the clergy, but for the entire assembly. CCC 2720 elucidates this by stating, “the Church invites the faithful to regular prayer: daily prayers, the Liturgy of the Hours, Sunday Eucharist, the feasts of the liturgical year”lxxxi and CCC 2662 supports this notion by stating, “the Word of God, the liturgy of the Church, and the virtues of faith, hope, and charity are sources of prayer.”lxxxii

Therefore, by nature of the Catechism’s definition of prayer, and by the explicit invocation of prayer during the Eucharist and liturgy of the Church, prayer occurs during every Mass.

Premise 7 – The Catholic Church cannot promulgate error.

In the ecumenical First Vatican Council, the First Dogmatic Constitution on the Church of Christ states,

So the fathers of the fourth council of Constantinople, following the footsteps of their predecessors, published this solemn profession of faith: The first condition of salvation is to maintain the rule of the true faith. And since that saying of our lord Jesus Christ, You are Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church, cannot fail of its effect, the words spoken are confirmed by their consequences. For in the apostolic see the catholic religion has always been preserved unblemished, and sacred doctrine been held in honour. Since it is our earnest desire to be in no way separated from this faith and doctrine, we hope that we may deserve to remain in that one communion which the apostolic see preaches, for in it is the whole and true strength of the christian religion...lxxxiiiFor the holy Spirit was promised to the successors of Peter not so that they might, by his revelation, make known some new doctrine, but that, by his assistance, they might religiously guard and faithfully expound the revelation or deposit of faith transmitted by the apostles. Indeed, their apostolic teaching was embraced by all the venerable fathers and reverenced and followed by all the holy orthodox doctors, for they knew very well that this see of St. Peter always remains unblemished by any error, in accordance with the divine promise of our Lord and Saviour to the prince of his disciples: I have prayed for you that your faith may not fail; and when you have turned again, strengthen your brethren.lxxxiv

From this ecumenical declaration, we learn that it is infallible Catholic doctrine that through the Holy Spirit, the apostolic see “remains unblemished by any error” when it comes to expounding “the revelation or deposit of faith transmitted by the apostles.” From simple deduction we can declare that since the Church claims ecumenical councils are infallible, and an ecumenical council states the Holy Spirit protects the Church from any error, then it necessarily follows that it the Church cannot officially promulgate erroneous doctrine.


Brief Exposition of Conclusions

Conclusion 8 – Given premises 1-3, the Bible is infallible.

Since God never lies, the Holy Spirit is God, and the Holy Spirit authored the Bible, it necessarily follows that the Bible is infallible. For what the Holy Spirit authors cannot err, since, by God’s nature, he is omniscient.

Conclusion 9 – Given premises 4, 5, and 8, The First Letter to the Corinthians infallibly says that women must be veiled when they pray.

As is clear from St. Paul’s own words, and confirmed from writings over the entire history of the Church, The First Letter to the Corinthians declares that women must be veiled when they pray. Since The First Letter to the Corinthians is included in the canon of scripture, and this scripture is infallible, then St. Paul’s injunction for women to veil when they pray is infallible. 

Conclusion 10 – Given premises 6 and 9, women must be veiled at Mass.

Since St. Paul’s injunction for women to veil when they pray is infallible, and prayer occurs at every Mass, it is therefore an infallible requirement for women to veil at Mass. 

Conclusion 11 – Given premises 7 and 10, the Church cannot contradict St. Paul by saying women do not have to veil when they attend Mass.

Since it is an infallible requirement for women to veil at Mass, and the Catholic Church cannot promulgate error, it is impossible for the Catholic Church to promulgate that women are not required to veil at Mass, or the Church would create a logical contradiction between their infallibility and the Bible’s infallibility. It should be noted that the 1983 Code of Canon Law does not promulgate that women are not required to veil, nor does the Catechism. Canons 20 and 21 from the new canon law state:

Can. 20 A later law abrogates, or derogates from, an earlier law if it states so expressly, is directly contrary to it, or completely reorders the entire matter of the earlier law. A universal law, however, in no way derogates from a particular or special law unless the law expressly provides otherwise.
Can. 21 In a case of doubt, the revocation of a pre-existing law is not presumed, but later laws must be related to the earlier ones and, insofar as possible, must be harmonized with them.lxxxv

Since there is no canon that “expressly” contradicts CIC 1262 from the 1917 Code of Canon Law, and “the revocation of a pre-existing law is not presumed,” CIC 1262 is still the latest Church promulgation on the requirement to veil. The Church therefore has not committed official error, though the requirement is clearly not being enforced, as it should be. Even if the Church did promulgate official doctrine that explicitly did not require the veil at Mass, the promulgation would be immediately invalid, as Fr. Nicholas Gruner wrote:

It is a divine injunction contained in Sacred Scripture in two different places commanding that women cover their heads in church or when they attend the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. This command, this precept, cannot be changed, abrogated, canceled, excused, by the Pope, the bishop, your parish priest or your personal confessor because they do not have jurisdiction to change this law.lxxxvi 
